The topic was Arthur C. Clarke, but before the panelists got ready to grapple
with Clarke's work, Frederik Pohl volunteered an explanation of Isaac Asimov's
prolific output as a writer, 170 books published to date. May I explain to you
how come it is that Isaac has published so many books? Because I know he's the
only person I know who is physically addicted to having his fingers on a
typewriter keyboard. if the keyboard is withdrawn for more than an hour and a
half at a time, he begins to go right up the wall. You can see him now beginning
to sweat and show withdrawal symptoms so that he likes to type. Well, that's
true enough. That's true enough. I have published 170 books so far, all
different varieties and stuff, and that's largely because writing, with a few
insignificant and unmentionable exceptions, writing is all I want to do. As a
matter of fact, the way it's done is by not having anyone to help me. I'm a one
-man operation. I have no secretary, no typist, no agent, no nothing. I answer
my own letters, answer my own telephone, do my own indexing and so on. It's to
that that I attribute the large output because if I had people working for me in
the first place, I couldn't possibly get them to work as long hours and as
unquestioningly, pardon, no genetic, and as unquestionably as unquestionably
myself do. As I myself do. And secondly, if I had people helping me, I'd spend
most of my time telling them what to do and looking over what they did and
discussing whether that's what ought to be done, and by saving all that time, I
write books. Isaac, let me ask a very simple question. I know you don't read
much science fiction now. You read some, though. Do you feel the same thrill
when you come across a good science fiction story that you used to feel? Almost.
When I come across one that appeals to me, and I must admit that lately it's
been more troublesome than it used to be. I got that thrill and I read
Rendezvous with Rama. Okay, fair. And let's see, what was, I recently read a
story that I liked very much, and it's escaped me. But the trouble is that
science fiction has changed easier. I'm not saying it's a bad thing, but it's
changed faster than my insight has. and I find that it's difficult. It hasn't
changed. There's still the basic core that hasn't changed that much. What's
happened is that it has developed all kinds of peripheral aspects. Now a lot of
people are writing things that are really fantasy and calling it science
fiction. They're also writing would-be mainstreams that they're calling. They're
sticking a little science fiction in order to get it published. They're
publishing anti-science books and calling them science fiction. But underneath
it all, there is, well, Arthur C. Clarke, you mentioned Rendezvous with Rama.
Arthur C. Clarke is still writing busily and he's done Imperial Earth recently.
Now, I suspect that you and I, as hardcore science fiction writers, are not
going to like that as well as Rendezvous with Rama. But I suspect that the
general reader, the reader of Arthur's books, is going to like it perhaps even
better because the characters are more important in it rather than the
background, as it was in Rendezvous with Rama. It's the story of the in the
fifth centennial of the United States and a man who comes back from space to
help celebrate it and what he finds on earth. Isaac Asimov then gave his version
of the Clarke Asimov Treaty with a little help from Lester Del Ray. You know, the
fact that science fiction writers, especially the old days, knew each other very
well, were friends as well as fellow writers partly is due to the fact that in
writing there's none of this sense of competition. You have many other
professions. In other words... There used not to be. There is now. Well, about
now, I don't know. But in the old days, the fact that you sold a story didn't
mean that someone else didn't sell a story. So there was no objection to being
friendly, to helping each other out, and so on. You'd both sell stories great.
It's still true. It's still true, but nowadays, people, there is a lot of
competition. And look, you and I and most of us, when we first started in,
didn't really consider ourselves big professional writers making a big career
out of writing and so on. We wrote the stuff because we wanted to write or
because we loved it, and we love the money on the top of it. Yeah, we also like
to read each other's stories. But that's it. When a good story came in, we were
so happy to see a good story that it didn't matter, so we were all friends. Now
there's all kinds of things going on. Well, I'm sorry for them. In any case,
among others, Arthur Clarke is a good friend of mine. And I remember once we were
riding down a taxi on Park Avenue, and we formed what he calls the Clarke-Asimov
Treaty of Park Avenue, and I call it the Asimov-Clarke Treaty of Park Avenue. He
said, and I do think it was he who suggested it first, but I fell in with it
eagerly, he said that whenever anyone was to ask me who is the best science
fiction writer in the world, I was to say Arthur C. Clarke. And whenever anyone
asked him who is the best science writer in the world, he was to say Isaac
Asimov. I've kept my part of the bargain, and I'm sure he's kept his part of the
bargain. I'm not sure either one really believes it, you understand, because I
think each one of us secretly thinks he's first in both categories. But we stick
to it. As a matter of fact, talking about the Clarke-Asimov Treaty, we are so
similar in styles in some way that people confuse us. At least every once in a
while I get someone who writes a letter to me and tells me how much he liked my
book, Childhood's End. And that, of course, is Arthur Clarke's great book, the
one that sort of made him a fixture in science fiction. One of the heartwarming
things you know about science fiction, and one of the little inside heartwarming
things is that if you're at a convention and somebody comes up to you with a
book that says, like childhood in by Arthur Clarke, and says, I badly want
Arthur's autograph, you will be nice and sign Arthur's name for it. We all do
this. Gordon Dickson is most famous for his thematic science fiction novels, of
which the Dorsai trilogy is the best known. Mr. Dickson has won science fiction's
two highest awards. the Hugo in 1965 for his short story. Soldier Ask Not and
the Nebula in 1966 for his novelette Call Him Lord. His eagerly awaited fantasy
novel The Dragon and the George will be published in paperback by Ballantine
this fall.
As a matter of fact, that was a bad example because Childhood's End is one I
haven't signed. And I think it's because Childhood's End did something. And I
agree with you, Arthur has written others that I read a little higher on the
scale. But Childhood's End has a bittersweet touch about it that I would like to
do someday and never have, although I started out to do it sometimes. Arthur has
two strains. He has the very hard science strain and he has a mystical strain in
his writing. And Childhood's End, like 2001, has a heavy infusion of both. It's
probably what makes them popular. It does not make them as popular with me, but
it certainly it makes them very popular. Childhood's End is unquestionably
recordings as the most popular of all Arthur's books. I happen to think that his
Earth Light, which has not apparently been discovered by a lot of people, is
actually a better book in many ways. Earth Light really should be reissued more
than it is. I wish the people would discover what a good book it is." Arthur's
work can be very hard science fiction, but it also can have that mystical
quality to it. There are touches of that in the earliest Closston novel he
wrote, which was the, not the lad in the line. It was a story taking place in an
ancient, abandoned city with a young boy going through it. City in the stars,
also known as, he published it twice under two different titles. Under two
different titles, differently written? More chutzpah than any other writer I
know. Yeah, same book. Yup. Slightly somewhat rewritten. They are in two
simultaneous editions under two different styles. I can't either. It was a great
book. It admired it immensely. Clarke has a reputation as a hard science writer,
but what strikes me as most interesting about his work is the colour and
invention of alien situations and surroundings, and characters in City of the
Stars and in his first novel novelette, novella rescue party, his first
published story. No! Second. I think he's first. Second, I thought the same
thing until I was checking up recently for a book I'm doing. Arthur thinks it's
the first, because he complains bitterly when people say it's his best, because
he likes to think that he's progressed since then. New Pol was his first
published one. Maybe, but at any rate, one of his first, which I think is a fine
story, and it's not the invention in it, it's not the science in it. It's the
feeling you have of a whole group of cultures meeting and interacting on each
other in a way that's never happened in the world. Yes. Arthur was once accused,
and he hated it, and yet there's an element of truth in it of having a very
pedestrian imagination. I don't take that the way the writer meant it. Arthur
does have a pedestrian imagination, which is a great asset to a writer. What he
has is, he has an imagination. And we've mentioned things about about his
imagination. And sometimes it's quite freewheeling, but most of the time it is
pedestrian in this sense—that Arthur's imagination works step by step by step by
step so that he details everything. He follows all the details except when he
gets into a slightly mystical frame when he goes off. But his imagination and
imaginary situations are detailed. You know how many legs the chair has. You
know where the rungs are somehow in Arthur's stories. Pedestrian is not a word I
would apply to Arthur's story. I'm misusing the word in my mind. There is a word
that I would apply to it that's almost equally pejorative. I think it's lucid.
What impresses me most about Clarke as a writer is that I understand what he's
trying to communicate in every line. There's no obfuscation, there's no playing
around with words just for the sake of the sound of them. He's very methodical
in his thinking, very methodical. He works everything out, and this is what the
critic called pedestrian, which is really unfair in the usual meaning of the
word. But penning terms on Arthur ... I would have used the word three
-dimensional. You remember in the Fall of Moon Dust, the particular reality... I
guess the Fall of Night, I guess that was the other time. I guess the Fall of
Night, yeah. That's right. But in the Fall of Moon Dust, when the people are
buried, under this dust, the scene is particularly real because it's
particularly solid. The world which is now narrowed down to the inside of this
little sightseeing bus, really has become a very hard world. You can touch it.
Well, that's the trick that Arthur has. Arthur measures his future without ever
losing sight of the romance of it because he still loves his futures. He
measures. He knows just where everything is located. And it's a strong asset,
this thoroughness, this methodical way with which he goes about making his
imagination real. You'll notice, by the way, that science fiction does not get
outmoded if it's good. The fact that the moon surface is not dusty, as some
people thought, before the First Landing, does not make a fall of moon dust a
bad story. Now, in the same way, the fact that we can go around the world in
eighty minutes doesn't at least make around the world in eighty days a bad
story. That made it by itself. I don't know, I liked it. I liked it. The fact
that you don't like something, Lester, is meaningless. You don't like anything.
No, I love a great many things? No, I don't like stock wooden characters. I
don't like the bathos and I don't like schlock development of a story. I don't
like the furniture to show all over the place. I don't like the big problem of a
story solved by cheap trickery and a lot of other things, all of which are
typical Jules Verne. Well this is not the place to argue Jules Verne, but I have
a feeling that he's going to keep on going even when you and I are out. But
Lester Del Rey does have his likes as well. I like a great many stories. When
Ursula Le Guin did Left Hand of Darkness, I jumped up and down in Glee. I read
the story, re-read the story immediately after reading it once, and I'll do that
still to things. There are a great many stories that I drag off the shelf. I
drag off the Hal Clement's stories periodically from the shelf. The best of
those, Mission of Gravity, Cycle of Fire.
Cycle of Fire is the great underrated one of Clements. It's really a splendid
story with the best characters he ever did, the best human character he ever did
in it, and a marvelous alien character, a lovely cooperative conflict between
the two, a fantastically well-developed background and a real problem behind it
all. I think perhaps his best story is from a technical point of view. And
Ballantine published it, I don't know how often has it been republished, I can't
remember, I have no idea but it should have sold much better than it did and it
isn't as well appreciated I hope that they I hope they they make a big splash
for it sometime well be careful Lester you're well known as the kiss of death
I'd like to know who all whether it's hell himself or whether some University
archives has got this tremendous amount of stuff that he makes up before he ever
starts writing all the doggun little notes from which he develops the solar
system from which he develops a planet from which he develops the continent from
which he develops some of that has been published you know now he did gravity I
think he he probably published an article in astounding about that what went
into the writing of it yeah he and pull does something like this what's that he
and pull have recently put together a particular solar system in world or
something and well I'm not sure what you mean there is what's known as Harlan's
which is the world that was invented for the purpose of writing stories
around...
There's a book out by Ballantine called Fire Time by Poul Anderson which uses
this world. I haven't seen any of Clements work on this world yet. I don't think
he's actually published any. All of us, to some extent, do that. I can't use a
story of faster than light travel without at least working out a theory to
account for it. Or, if I'm going slower than the speed of light, I very
carefully work out the energy requirements of the thing. I have elaborate notes
that used to take me days and days working on one of the things. Now that I've
got myself a lovely little calculator that will do all those things almost
instantly, it saves me a great deal of time. But none of this ever goes into my
story. Clement and Arthur and so on put more of it into the story than I do,
I've got to know this before I feel comfortable in the world I've created, I
have to know this. There are writers who get along beautifully without it. I
think one of my favourite science fiction writers of all time, Cordwainer Smith,
never once troubled his pretty little head about space drives. What he was
interested in describing was different kinds of societies. But those he worked
out in detail. worked him out beautifully but the mechanics of how they came to
be he never really explained he didn't say how the spaceships managed to get
from one planet to another in this immense galaxy-wide culture that he dealt
with he didn't really explain how the robot imitations of human beings existed
or what the evolved cat people and mother Hittens little kittens goes into
detail into the mechanics of lesbace driving. You're right. Fred, yours and mine
least regarded story appeared in the same magazine with Cordwainer Smith's first
fantasy book number six had Little Man on the Subway by Isaac Asimov and James
McRae, who is you, and in the same issue of the semi-pro magazine was Scanners
Live in Vein by Cordwainer Smith, and for another eight years he didn't write
anything. For another eight years, he didn't write anything because nobody
happened to read that magazine, which had a circulation of four. Well, didn't
you get into writing again, Fred? I did reprint that story in an anthology I did
a couple of years later, which I think is the first time he ever reached more
than four people with one story. And he didn't write more, I think, not so much
because he didn't get feedback, but because I don't think he was aware of the
existence of magazines to publish the stories. I don't think Paul Linebarger,
which was his real name, actually read very much science fiction, uniquely among
the good writers of science fiction I know. And it wasn't until editors like
Horace Gold and a little later myself began getting after him and urging him to
write that he began producing in value. How old is when he died? In his middle
60s. His whole science fiction writing career, except for two stories, occupied
about five years from about 59 to 64 I think it was when he died, during which
time he produced a body of work that has as large a coterie audience as most
writers who were writing for 40 years. Yeah well a lot of that, not all of it,
but a lot of it is in print now fortunately, and for the first time his novel
Norstralia, Old North Australia, which is a planet not located on earth.
Australia is available in complete form, and it was previously, it was chopped
up into pieces and butchered, so he's really reaching his maximum audience now.
Kurt Weiner Smith, under his real name Paul Linebarger, was a specialist in
Eastern Affairs for the State Department. He'd been born, I think, in China and
lived there for a long time and spent a lot of time commuting back and forth.
Last year when I was traveling in Eastern Europe for the State Department, I
went to a particular city where the American ambassador was known to be hostile
to all writers and to science fiction writers in particular. And when I was
introduced to the ambassador, I expected to get a hard time. But it turned out
that he had been a student of Linebarger's, and he mellowed immensely.
Two questions were then posed to the panel. What book would you most like to be
remembered for, and what book by a colleague do you wish you had written? Isaac
Asimov? If I'm going to be remembered, it's probably going to be the Found for
the Foundation Trilogy. But what I would like to be remembered for is the second
part of the gods themselves, because I have frequently been told I don't write
any sex and that I don't write any extraterrestrials and I wanted to show the
world I could write about extraterrestrials I wanted to show them I could write
about sex so I wrote the second part of Gods Themselves which was completely and
100% about extraterrestrial sex and it was the best extraterrestrials ever
anyone ever wrote about and the best extraterrestrial sex anyone ever wrote
about And if I have to be asked what story by somebody else I would really have
liked to have written, it would be Neutron Star by Larry Niven. Because I once
wrote an article about tides. And when I saw this story, for which he won a
Hugo, I said to myself- And a nebula. And a nebula. I said to myself, my
goodness, I could have written that story because I had the entire background in
my article. And I said to Larry Niven, you know I could have written that story
because I had the entire background in article. He said, I know, I read the
article. That's what I got. Frederik Pohl. If I were to choose one story to be
engraved on my tombstone, I'd have to be a big tombstone because I'd like to
choose three. There's a short story called Day Million, which I wrote so easily
and painlessly that I've always been desperate to recapture that flow of
inspiration that came out so quickly and happily. there's a novelette called the
gold at the starbows end and there's a novel not yet published called gateway
which i think is the best of them all but it's a hundred thousand words i don't
know how much of it you can engrave on a tombstone as for what other people have
written that i wish i had written there's a lot of h.g wells that i admire
immensely novels and short stories that It's an ability not just to write well
or to write interestingly but invent whole new areas of writing. The time
machine is a major invention and I wish I could have written something like
that. Lester Del Rey. I find myself in a peculiar position on the second part
of this as to what I wrote. I don't in the first place, expect to be remembered.
oh, I suppose some of my stuff will be remembered by people who read well they
were very young until 50 years after I was dead, but I really don't think if I'd
wanted to be remembered I wouldn't have picked a somewhat transient field like
science fiction where your stories inevitably do get out of date sometimes and
well your chances of being remembered by the critics are smaller or used to be
smaller than elsewhere, I'm not writing for the ages I'm writing for my own
pleasure and for the readers of the day and if they are happy with my things,
and if I enjoy what I'm doing, sufficient under the day is the good thereof as
well as the evil. I suppose if I had to pick one story, just one, we remembered
I'd be torn between two, Helen and Loy, in spite of the fact it was my second
story, and a story I wrote for Fred Pohl, and that was For I am a Jealous
People. As to somebody else's story I wish I'd written. One small short story by
a man named Joseph Kalam which most people have forgotten called When the Eagles
Gather perhaps. Generally I don't feel that way about other writers work. I'm
glad they wrote it. I enjoy it thoroughly. I find enough of their individuality
in it as a rule that I don't want to. There is... Do you remember the last line
of that story, Lester? Is that the one that ended about it as a sad... No, no,
no, that was of McFarlane's story you're thinking of. The story of another man
that I wish I could write has not been written yet. That consists of the last
three books which Isaac Asimov has not written to finish up his Foundation
series, which She gave me the right to write. For the record, I never did. For
the record, it's in print and on tape that you did, which he now, being an
Indian giver, has taken back. In blood. If not somebody else's. Gordon Dickson.
This is a hard thing for me to answer, not because I have any doubt about the
answer, but it's fitting the category. See, I have absolutely no doubt about
what I want to be remembered for. It's the child cycle. but I'm going to have to
do the whole Blinken thing to do it, because only if I do it right will it turn
out to be a structured piece of fiction in 12 parts, running through the
historical framework, the contemporary framework, and into the future fiction
framework,
and also of a type that I firmly believe and hope has not been done before that
I've labeled the conscious thematic novel. So it'll take me 15 more years to do
it And at the end of that time, if I've done it right It'll come out that way
and I want to be remembered for it As far, I've got a different type of problem
In choosing a book that I wish I had written Because I have to sort of grab at
random Between about a dozen books I've already mentioned Arthur's Childhood's
End I could pick Paul's Brainwave And I pulled one of my famous blank outs
jaunting healthy bastard Malfe Balfe's what's the tiger tiger or stars my
destination stars my destination is what I'm thinking of but I can go on and I'm
as I say eight to ten more and what I want from each one of them is one
particular thing see I'd like to take the ring out of the idols eye or nose here
and you know still Lee the jewel from its gown someplace else this type It's
difficult really for anybody, for me at least, and I think for most writers to
say what story of someone else's... he wishes he had written. There are a lot of
stories which are inordinately successful and I wish I had had stories that
successful which have been... won awards that I haven't won and so on. But the
only thing any writer has to sell is his own individual personal point of view.
and there would be no way for me to have written Nightfall or the Foundation
series or Helen Alloy or any of the great stories that I've admired so much
because they weren't my stories. The only stories I know how to write are mine.
Settle for that, Fred. They're pretty good. I think that is generally true. I
think that when we say, I wish I had written that, we do always see one thing in
it that's near and dear to our heart and we wish we'd had the chance to write
the story about that. Can I end by telling you a little anecdote? Can we stop
you? No, you can't. Fred Pohl and I, Isaac Asimov, and Ben Bova and Gordy Dickson,
with a few attached ladies, were sitting around a single table in Toronto at the
World Science Fiction Convention there and two years' 73, and- Agonising meal, I
remember it well. Yes. said, I won the Hugo for the novel and Fred won it for
the short story and Ben won it for editorship. And there they were, a series of
Hugos at the table and we all turned, well at least I turned to Gordy Dickson. I
said, Gordy, you're disgracing us. And I hung my head. Yes, you did.
ultimately.
This has been The Ballantine Science Fiction Hour.